Could you please tell us what is your name and your date of birth?
Mine? Alexsy Agdylovič, Alexsy Agdylovič, born in the year of 1922.
AlexsyAnglovič?
The surname
The surname is Wajcen, yes.
second, year of birth
We just want to see his face so that he will look into
the camera or at us. So, great. That´s perfect.
Where was he born?
Where were you born?
I was born in the West Ukraine, the city of Lvov.
Lvov? The Ukraine.
Yes
Not far from Lvov
[Rooms?] Lvov. In Ukraine
Are you going to speak English or Deutsch?
I guess, I will speak English
Ok, then please. Yeah? That’s good. So, let's do that. Was it a städtel?
There, were you were born, was it a städtel ? Jewish rural community, rural community, place?
That is a Jewish township
A Jewish village
A village
It was a Jewish village.
Yes. And what was the name of the village?
And the village is called
Hodorov
Hodorov, Hodorov
I know, I know, I know
She knows, I don´t know that, she knows
And, eh, did you come from a very large family?
Did you have a large family?
We had five, five, five children. A sister
Five brothers and sisters?
Yes
Five brothers and sisters
I understand
I see
They were older or younger?
The older one, the younger one? Were they older than you, younger?
I was the oldest one.
He was the oldest
And they survived the war or not at all?
And did they survive during the war or didn’t survive?
They were killed before the war
Not before the war, but during the war
During the war
As the Germans took the Western Ukraine
When the Germans took Western Ukraine, they were killed
They were killed by the Germans and not by the Ukrainians?
But not all of them
Were it the Nazis or Ukrainians?
Ukrainian Fascists
They were destroying the village
The village?
Well, who was destroying the village? Who was destroying it?
Eh? Who was destroying it?
The Ukrainians or the Germans?
The Ukrainians, the Ukrainians
The Ukrainians?
The Western ones, yes, benderovcy
The Western ones, [benderovcy
They killed his family
Yes, there they]were shooting
Ukrainians
They were shooting down the village
Horrible
I understand, I understand
But not all of the family
Not all of it?
No
Not all of the family
Who was killed by the Ukrainians and who by the Germans?
And who was the victim of the Ukrainians and who the victims of the Nazis?
His brother was with him in Sobibor
Brother?
The younger one
His brother was, the Ukrainians, his brother. His brother was killed by the Ukrainians
They actually, they actually belonged to Poland, to their
time they were, they lived in the Polish State
Who they? They- the family?
Well, the family,
Ok, they
and that territory itself belonged to Poland before the year 39.
This territory was part of Poland till 39 and they were leagued to the
Poles, that’s there were a kind of their, that was their connection
After the year 39 this territory came under the possession of the Soviet Union
After 39 this part of the territory went to the, was subjected to the Soviet Union
I know
Well, so, in the year of 40 he went to serve in the ranks of the Soviet Army
1940, yeah
Could you be so kind, that you first talk about the period before the war,
that we then spend this afternoon some time on this time in the army and
that tomorrow we will talk about Sobibor and how he was prisoned
Maybe, today we will talk with you about your life before the war and your life during
the war, and if we are allowed to come to you tomorrow, a little bit, we will talk
then about Sobibor, I don´t know, that is you, is it comfortable for You or
As we will be able to, as we will be in time
Good, we
He actually, so to say, he doesn´t give up, he will always win the
fight, even if it is difficult for him, but he will, so to say
Thank you, thank you. Ok
He will, he will talk, but we, we
He won´t show it, the old fighter. Well, how to explain – he is still
a fighter, he is an old, so to say, with such kind of hardening
An old military man
Yes, even if he is doing not well, he won´t let himself down, he will hold on. Later, well,
yes, after the guests leave- that´s it, he will fell down, will lay down and will sleep, yes,
will take a rest, so if So if we are not able to do something today, somewhere, then
Ok, he wants to see, where we can get up today, it’s totally unpredictable not overstrain?
Won´t be in time, then tomorrow
Then tomorrow
All right, all right
Ok, I want him to talk about his family home and tell me for instance, did you
go to school with only Jewish children or also with not Jewish children?
She is very eager to know about your life home, in your family, well, for example, your school,
was it a Jewish school or were there other, different children, not only Jewish children?
No, there were Ukrainian classes and polish classes, and Russian
Polish, Ukrainian and Jewish classes
There were Poles, Ukrainians and Jews
So, did they have good relations between these three groups?
Did they have normal relations, between these groups or not?
Before the year 39 was it always so, so they were friends, they were not.
No, after that at school, you, you learned at school
I learned, I finished
how did they treat you, how did you treat the Poles, the Ukrainians, how did you treat?
Well, we were, treated normally
Normally between each other
Yes, yes.
The relations were relatively normal in school. Until the year 39?
Until
Until 1939
From the year 39 I served in the Soviet Army
Well, so to say, he was already 17 in the 39th,
Oh well, the 39th
The 39th
And in 39 he was already 17, so he went into the Soviet Army
He was finishing school, you went in Poland to school, right?
In Poland, yes
And finished ten classes in Poland
Also in Poland
He started and finished his ten classes in Poland
I understand ,is “rozumem” a good word?
No, „ponimaju” [laughing]
I understand, understand. Go for the Bosanski. And And
can you tell a little bit about home, Friday evening?
Can you tell us anything about Friday nights at your home
Sabbath, did you have special Friday nights, at home?
We celebrated that one, Jewish one
Jewish one
Jewish holiday Sabbath, but not all, not all
Sometimes they celebrated?
Not all of them
Not all. But sometimes?
No. Not all: not all of your family or not all Jews, families?
Not all of you celebrated, of your family or do you take all the families?
All of us, me always
You take the village, yes? You take, you mean the village?
The village, yes
That not everybody in the village celebrated that holiday
Yes, yes
But they
Their family celebrated
Celebrated?
Yes
They celebrated on Fridays, but not all the families there did.
Was it an orthodox family? Did they go to Schul?
Did you have an orthodox family, at your´s, you were in the synagogue, well,
in the Jewish synagogue or not? Did you do something religious, orthodox or
Did you visit the synagogue, Grandfather?
Visited the synagogue, so, visited
Well, so, you personally visited?
I, I don´ remember now
Did your family visit?
He doesn’t remember
I don´t remember
He doesn’t remember if he went to synagogue
But there was a synagogue in the village?
There was a synagogue, a big synagogue
There was a synagogue in the
They destroyed it in the year of 39
Violated?
In 39, they destroyed it
They destroyed it in 39
That´s maybe, as they came over into the Soviet Union
When the Soviets came
Can you tell him, I very much want him to talk about himself and not about general history
We will be very glad to hear something about your life, that what your
understand about that time, some, I understand that it was long ago
Does he have a very happy memory of his childhood?
Do you have any happy memories about your childhood there?
Our childhood belonged to the family name, good
Family name?
Do you have any childhood memories?
I have, I have, have
Maybe you will tell us something about these good childhood memories
Maybe he can tell us something about his memories, because he has
How did you live, what did you do
We are living in the past, we don´t have those days any more, so to sayThis one,
five brothers, sister and brother, there was a younger brother, he was also
How did you live at that time?
We lived, we lived, lived good
As you were small?
Lived, lived normally
Houses? What kind of did you have?
[?] Livestock, were breeding, yes
Did you have close relationships with the family, with brothers and sister, good relationships
with the family? Well, just want to have a picture about your life then
With everybody, was your family amicable or not?
[?] close in his family
Well, me Father married a western Ukrainian girl, father married a western Ukrainian girl
His mother was a western Ukrainian girl
Mother was a western Ukrainian girl
His mother was a western Ukrainian. A Jewish girl
A Jewish girl, Jewish, she was a Jewish girl
She was a Jewish girl?
Yes
He says she was Jewish and he says she was
But she was not Polish girl, she was a western Ukrainian girl
From Western Ukraine, his mother. And Papa from
A Jew
Papa a Jew? Papa was also Jewish
Was his mother Was it a rich family?
Eh?
Did you have wherewithal, a rich family?
How to say, neither rich nor poor
Not rich and not poor
But generally, well-off. There is everything, there was own milk. Yes
Well, an own cow.
An own cow, and not only one cow, but there were 4 cows.
A cow? Aha, he had
Four
Four? They had four cows. Very good [laughing]
[unclear] You are fantastic, but
I want to ask him, in 39 he did see the Soviet Army coming?
In the year of 39, did you see how the Soviet eh-eh-eh
Yes. In the year of 39 we lived. Until the year of 39
You lived? In Poland?
In Poland
Did you see the Soviets, as they came, when the Army, when
As Poland [unclear] came into
How did the process of changeover from Poles to Russians pass? How did that process proceed?
The process? Proceeded normally
Normally?
Normally
Proceeded normally? He’s saying, the process of the Soviets
coming in was normal, I’m just trying to think it out
I understand
Yeah
This is my historical knowledge. I understand.
Ok
And how did he get into the army? Did he get a letter or did he
go himself to the army? So, how did he land to be in the army?
How did you become a military man, did you received a letter, an invitation
or did you decide by yourself – I want to be in the Army? Or how you
No, the army incorporated
Regulated by law at the age of 18
Regulated by law, yes
18 years law
Regulated by the law of the Soviet Union at the age of 18
There was a law in the Soviet Union- at 18 you had to
And where did he go when he went to the army?
And where did you go, what was your first step into the Army, where
did you have to go? Where did you start to be a military man?
Where did you start to serve during the first days of the Army?
The first days I served in Hodorov
In Hodorov?
In Hodyr, Hodyr
Yes
Did he get a letter to go there?
Did you received a letter as you had become 18 – you have to serve
or you just knew – have to, have to go to some office?
To the army, how was you, they issued a summons?[ Grandfather?
Ah? Did they issue a summons to go to the Army on you?
Issued a summons, yes
He received an official letter. Yes, he received the official letter
Was he scared of the Germans at that time?
At that time were you afraid of the Germans? Or not? At that time?
As you were leaving to the Army? Before the war. Were you scared of the Germans?
I was scared, people were always scared
Were scared?
Yes
Were scared, yes?
In the year of 40?
In 40? In 39
No, as you were called into the Army, were you scared of the Germans?
Yes, yes
Were scared?
He was called in the army in 40, and yes, he was afraid of them
Of the Germans?
Yes
He knew, what the Germans were doing already?
Had you already understood what kind of people they were, those
Nazis, had you understood something about them to that time?
To that time you had already heard about what Hitler was
doing? In the Soviet Union and in the world in general?
I heard at our place: the German attacked the Soviet Union
But it was in 41
In 41
And in 40 you came to serve into the Army, did you heard what Hitler was doing?
Came, we were summoned to the Army
But did you know about it?
I knew
That Hitler got the war started?
Yes
Hitler is going to Europe? He knew
How did you know about the things Hitler had done? How you? Did you hear from
other people? I’m trying to ask to, how he knew about, about the nature of
People talked under themselves, told everything, that the German attacked, knew everything
People were talking?
Were talking
So, do you actually need him to say There were conversations,
there were rumors and there was enough?
So, was he motivated to go in the Soviet Army to fight Hitler?
So, as you knew and suspected that you knew about Hitler, were you motivated to be
a soviet soldier, so you could fight with him? Was it a good motivation for you?
I was summoned Well, how should I say
Responsibility, responsibility
Responsibility. That was regulated by law, we had to serve in the Soviet Army
You felt you had to, didn´t you?
No, I don´t feel that assurance in me – well, you have to go, so to say, responsibility.
Because the German was tough, the German was. And the Jewish were halfupper?
[Whisper on the background]
There is the other side of the question. How did you see it, so the life, you
started your life and lived, before the army you lived in Poland, how did you
sensed serving the Soviet Union in the ranks of the soviet military forces?
In the ranks of the soviet army, sure, they lived better. They lived better, in freedom
You lived better?
Before the German occupied the territory which he
I would like to ask Mr. Waitsen – he went into the army and he
met many people who were not Jewish. How was life in the army?
How?
She would like to ask to Mr. Waitsen: You served in the Army, and how
did you get acquainted there with many people, who were not Jews?
How was your collective life in the Army?
The army was good
The Army was good
German, Polish – it didn´t matter
The German-Polish relations were good in your Army
Yes. Very good
There were good relations in the army. Normal
Normal
Normal relations between the Jews and not-Jews. So, that
you are a Jew, and there were others, who were not Jews
And at one stage, when the war started, what happened with him, did he fight during the war?
What, what?
As the war begun, did you immediately start to fight or what happ
It means, into the Army and hold
No
Why no?
As the war begun
The war begun, yes
Where did you meet it?
I met, I was there, in the 33th
In the army?
He says – in the Soviet Army, 39. As the war started, where were
you at that moment? I’m asking, where he was when the war [?]
Good. Did he have to fight?
Did you fight in the army? Did you have to fight into the army?
I fought in the army
Yes
Fought during the time of the soviet army, in the soviet army, in the Soviet Union
[unclear]
We were summoned during the time of the soviet army and we ended with
the soviet army, incorporated with the Red Army incorporated
Fought in the Red Army? Оk, and he fought in the Soviet Army
Eh, and then they made you prisoner?
Eh?
[Telephone is ringing]
When did you become a prisoner, when were you taken into captivity?
I didn´t understand
You became a prisoner, you, you, you a prisoner of war, for you
No, no, no, no. We fought
You fought? No, we were fighting. Do you want to ask
another question, to further, you remember or not?
Yeah. He was fighting, but at one stage he came to Minsk
[Telephone is ringing]
But to the certain moments you were in Minsk
The Germans caught him
The Germans took you in Minsk, if we well
Yes, that is
Tell
We already served in the Soviet Army and in the Soviet Union. After that
we were taken from the ranks of the Soviet Army, in the Soviet Army
Eh
Yeah, please, please
You help me, when you can, please
[unclear]
I would like to see if he can get in image, how he became prisoner,
and as far as I know, he was imprisoned in the ghetto of Minsk
We want to understand, well, how did you become eh-eh-eh a prisoner, into captivity, in captivity.
She thought, that was in Minsk, in ghetto, in ghetto of Minsk. But maybe, we not
No, no?
Not in ghetto, in Minsk, and there is no ghetto in Minsk. This is liquidated [unclear] ghetto
He was not in the ghetto
He was taken into captivity from the ranks of the Soviet Army
From the Soviet Army? He was taking from the ranks of the Soviet Army into prisoner of war?
But he ran away
And he escaped
Where was he taken?
Where did he go to?
No, where
Ah, where was he taken into captivity? Where were you taken into captivity?
Into captivity, concretely to Sobibor?
To Sobibor you mean?
He was taken into captivity several times
No, he was imprisoned at one stage and then This is impossible!
He was taken into captivity three times
Sorry
3 times
He was taken 3 times
And can he then tell this story, but please – not him
Where those 3 times? Where was it?
Can he tell, please
On which territory? As you escaped those three times, the
first times, where were you taken into captivity?
Me?
In Minsk?
No, no, no, they took me in Poland
In Poland?
Yes
In Poland
Near Warsaw
That into Sobibor?
Into Sobibor? No
That as you were running away – near Warsaw
Near Warsaw
And as you were taken to Sobibor, then where, as you were already
sent into the camp? At what place did they take you?
It means, into the camp we
No, at what place?
To the camp?
No, at what place, place? In Poland?
In Poland
And he was in Poland when he was taken to Sobibor
Near Warsaw
Ok
Several times?
Yes
So, can he tell a little bit a story that he escaped 3 times. One time and
the last time he escaped from Sobibor, but the 2 other times, please
Could you tell us anything about your escapes from Sobibor?
Well, about Sobibor, yes, you escaped 2 times
I escaped many times
Many times he escaped
Yes. I escaped about 6 times
Six times he escaped
Out of the camp from wire, we cut off the wire and left
Moment. Out of the camp, out of
Which camp are you talking about?
They ask about escape from Sobibor
No, previous to Sobibor, how many times did you escape? As they
took you, well, wanted to shoot down, previous to Sobibor
Before Sobibor? About three times. Me that, I escaped in the Western Ukraine
Three times up to Sobibor he escaped
From where?
And from which place did you escape?
Into captivity, into captivity, where was that?
(He) says, that (was) in Poland
In Poland, in Poland, in Poland
Can you, please, tell a little bit a story, we really don’t know
Do you remember anything about these moments? How were you escaping out of the captivity?
The first time I escaped in the Western Ukraine and the second time I was escaping somewhere
through Poland, and after that the third time also near Poland, also escaped
First time was Western Pol, Western Ukraine, that he escaped,
the second time in Poland and the third time in Poland
So, can you tell me, he arrived by train in Sobibor? About his arrival?
Did you come to Sobibor by train? Do you remember anything about the train to Sobibor?
To Sobibor? By echelons, we were going by echelons. In Poland
Sobibor and they immediately tugged us to the camp
You were in the echelons? After that out of the train
By train, by train
They went in echelons and they were taken into the camp, in echelons
He met immediately with the other Russian prisoners?
You immediately, you immediately saw or get acquainted with other Russian prisoners there?
Not immediately
Not immediately, with the time
What happened first?
What happened there at once?
At once I [?] was not yet. They shot, killed, brought into
the camp andthere were different, different things
At once with many others already They shut many of them right
away, eliminated them. That’s what happened first
And you were elected for work?
And you were elected to work there?
To work, worked, went to clean the street, everything, we cleaned everything.
And then, one beautiful day, there was an order of the city commandant, there
was an order – to summon to the army from then till then
No, about the camp, at the camp already, in Sobibor
In Sobibor? No, in Sobibor they didn´t summon, no
How did you work there?
How in Sobibor?
Yes
In Sobibor –with no plane all the time –abolished, killed
They eliminated people, they shut them
Where did you work yourself?
I worked on doing cleaning, cleaning premises, cleaning premises, cleaning [unclear]
He cleaned [?] there
Did he clean the trains, trains, which transported people?
And your work, you also did cleaning the train, which was used as a transport
means, did you also work there, there are such premises or
Did you also do cleaning the territory around the train? The echelon?
Did cleaning the echelon, and also we were went and cleaned the train
No, so to Sobibor was arriving an echelon, did you do cleaning of that platz?
At that time in Sobibor, one time, to the left, to the right,
aimed and that´s it – under the bullet, the execution
And that´s all. You did not meet the train
The train - no
So as on the platform you didn´t meet the train and didn´t clean anything
No, no
He did not clean the trains, he did not meet the trains
He cleaned other places
Yes
What kind of places, please?
What kind of premises, you told, what other premises? The barracks?
The kitchen?
No. We immediately into the camp under the bullet, the German – at once, was shooting, killing
In the camp, what kind of work did you do at the camp?
Cleaning harvesting?
In Sobibor?
In Sobibor
And cleaning what?
Eh?
Cleaning what? What harvesting?
Cleaning the territory
Which one?
Cleaned platz, platz of the camp
Platz?
Yes
And after that at the camp, what kind of work did you have to do?
Well, that at the German camp, at their place, cleaned that one, they had so to say a law- cleaning
It's difficult to ascertain what he was doing there, cleaning
As you on sorting, they left you there after that?
Yes, there[during 6 moths we were sent into the camp, to clean the camps
To do sorting things
To do sorting, yes
Were you immediately sent to?
No
Before that you
Before that we worked variously
Variously, yes, depended on where you were sent?
He is trying to find out about the selection, whether he was sent somewhere right away or not
It doesn’t make sense, I just wonder, what he was cleaning.
It you? must be much more close to his feelings
Yes Maybe, I will try one more time. He said they cleaned premises.
What kind premises were those – the barracks or
The barracks
The barracks? Cleaning barracks
There were many cleaning tasks in Sobibor
They were there, where they were shooting
They were shooting
It must be a frightful memory
These are awful memories for you
And I sincerely apologize that we are doing this to you, him?
And she apologizes herself very much that we are arousing such awful memories for you
So
Did he have friends in Sobibor, when he finally reached the camp?
Did you have any friend in Sobibor?
I had - Pečërskij
Pečërskij was your friend
He was your
He has gone to Israel now
Don´t mess up, don´t mess up, Pečërskij died
He said, he went to Israel now and that he died
Who died?
Pečerskij
Not at all
Ok, I interviewed Semjon Rozenfeld
She took an interview from Semjon Rozenfeld
Rozenfeld, yes. He lives in Israel
He is in Israel
He sends you his best wishes
He messed it up
He sends you the best wishes. She visited him
In Israel?
Yes
At Rozenfeld´s?
Yes, that´s her job, she
Greetings, she delivers you his greetings
Warm greetings
Warm greetings? smiling
He is very happy to hear that and he wonders: in Israel? And I – yes, because it’s your work
Rozenfeld is very well
He is in good health, Rozenfeld
Good health?
Yes
And he’s very nice man
And a very nice person
In Israel?
Yes, Rozenfeld is in Israel, yes
I don´t want
To visit Israel
to go anywhere
You He doesn’t want to go anywhere, he doesn’t want to go to Israel
Did he know Rozenfield also in Sobibor?
Did you know Rozenfeld in Sobibor as well?
I knew him previous to Sobibor
You knew him?
I knew
Yes, he knew him
Can he tell me, how, how he met Pečerskij and Rozenfield?
Ehhh
Later he took his wife there, in Israel, took his wife there
Later he took his wife to Israel? Yes? Then afterwards he took his wife to Israel
Rozenfeld?
Mh, ah, she is eager to know You want to know, how he met Pečerskij and Rozenfeld?
Yeah, how
How did you get acquainted with Pečerskij and Rozenfeld in Sobibor? How did you get acquainted?
In the camp
How did you see him for the first time?
Yes, we met several times in the camp, worked together
How did you meet him for the first time?
Well, how
Got acquainted?
Were going to work – and got acquainted
Just by the way you Just They just met in the camp
You knew that he was one of the prisoner there, didn´t you?
Yes
Can you remember a little bit about, how they met and how they had conversations?
Do you remember anything about your acquaintance, your talks
between each other? I understand, it´s long ago [laughing]
We spoke Hebrew
They spoke in Hebrew. Is it true?
Yes
Yes, they spoke in Hebrew
With each other?
Sorry?
Did you speak Hebrew to each other?
Yes
Not Russian?
Not in Russian language?
The wife was a Jew
His wife is
And his children are Jews, Rosenfeld´s
And the children
You spoke to Pečerskij and Rozenfeld in Russian or in Hebrew?
Hebrew
In Sobibor?
[speaking Yiddish]
You spoke to each other Yiddish, Hebrew, yes?
It’s Yiddish
Yea
Communicated, how did you communicated?
In Hebrew
In Ru.. In Hebrew?
He is saying, they spoke in Hebrew, they spoke with each other
Because the Germans could not understand?
Lest the Germans understood you?
What?
Well, you talked to each other Hebrew lest the Germans understood you or because you managed to
We communicated in Hebrew
Lest the Germans understood you?
Lest understood
Well, maybe lest those guards – the Wachmanns understood
Wachmanns didn´t understand a lot, but we talked with each other in Hebrew
Well, yes, from the Germans, yes
We think [unclear] possible
All of it
So Did he meet Pečerskij and Rozenfeld for the first time in Sobibor?
Did you get acquainted with Pečerskij and Rosenfeld for the first time at the camp, in Sobibor?
They, they were brought from Minsk
From Minsk?
No, you say – they were brought from Minsk?
They were brought
Аha, Oк
And there we got acquainted with Pečerskij, got acquainted in that way. At the first
day of the acquaintance we were picked up from the platform to work, to pick up
The first time
As they started working, yes, they
Ok ehhh They came in from Minsk, but they met when they
went to work in Sobibor, that’s when they met
And were you immediately impressed by Pečerskij?
What impression made
[Telephone is ringing]
What impression did Pečerskij make on you? A good impression, at once a good impression?
He was good to me, good relationship with Pečerskij
One more time, please
We had a good relationship with Pečerskij
Good? He had a good relationship with Pečerskij. And your first impression? A good one?
Our relationship stayed good
No, so, as a person you met him for the first time and what did you think about him?
I thought that he, we understood each other, that we are good people
You understood each other
They understood each other, he felt as soon as he met him - he is a good man
Fantastic
Well, perfect
Eh, and then when did he get involved in the uprising?
He You mean him, Mr. Waitsen or Pečerskij?
No, he, Mr. Waitsen. I’m only asking about Mr. Waitsen
Ok, when did you get involved into uprising in Sobibor, when did you start?
We lived in different barracks not all of us lived
Lived in different barracks
That was in different barracks?
Yes
And when
Well, they didn´t live together
Not the same barrack
Whom, when They were Didn´t live together? No, they were not
in the same barrack, they were living in different barracks
Ok
And when did you personally start to participate in the uprising?
He started to participate from the first days
From the first day
They started to develop the uprising two weeks beforehand
Let him talk, please
Then, in general, smelled, got to know each other: who is from
where, already to that time we didn´t accept for the Germans
So you, if I understand it well, you, they talked between themselves
Yes
Ok, they talked among themselves, in kind of, they did it very, very discreetly
And then What was his role in the uprising?
They, they
And you
Ah, and the German died in Minsk, the German
But German died
That one2 weeks, ten days as he died, Pečerskij
Eh, who?
I guess I mess it up
No, not two weeks ago, he died long ago
He died not long ago. He died two weeks ago
Answer the question, please. How long did you prepare yourselves,
how did you get ready? How long did you prepare yourselves?
We got ready for three month for the uprising, three month
You said - two weeks
Three months
We’re trying to understand, how they, how they prepared the strike. For two weeks you got ready?
Three weeks, the uprising
Three mo Three weeks lasted the uprising?
Weeks, not month, that they
Organized?
Yes
They prepared for three weeks
Thought it all over
thought of that, planned it for three weeks
How that all
how everything
And Pečerskij was the leader, wasn’t he?
Pečerskij was the chief of the uprising, was the leader? Pečerskij?
Pečerskij was chosen to be a head
He was the oldest, he was the senior guy
And so When the uprising started, how did he get out of the camp?
As the uprising started, how did you run away out of the camp? How did you yourself?
We lived, worked: at 7o´clock in the morning to work and at
8 p.m. home from work . That´s it. All the time 12 hours
That daily
Daily
And how did you behave yourselves on that day, how did you work on the day of the uprising?
The day of the uprising
Yes
Ah, that all was discussed between us, discussed, the plans
allWe don´t understand them, they don´t understand us
They made plans und knew, what time to start or I just want to understand
Yes, yes, yes, they just chose a day and appointed on this day
We’re trying to understand, what happened: they chose a day and
I don’t need it
Ok, ok, ok
I want to know
She wants to know how were you running away from Sobibor, how did you get in time
How did it all happen?
How did you personally manage to?
We talked to each other at work –and that´s all
And how were you getting out of the camp, well, you personally, how were you getting out?
SpI Me, me personally, how was I getting out
SpNN You left the camp, yes?
Left, well after the wire fencing I left the camp
And in which lines: in the front, in the middle, or in the back? How did you leave?
In the front lines, I was among the leaders
And you left before or after?
After
After all the others
He says, that he was one of the last to leave Ah, what, you just
No, no, no, no. That’s ok
Ok, ok
Did he go through the main gate or did he climb over the fence?
Aha, ok, you left through the front entrance or over the fence, how did you physically
Over the fence, over the fence
Aha, over the fence
And then he ran?
And then you ran fast?
After that we cut the wire off, the wire and were getting out
Fencing, wire fencing
Aha
Fencing
They cut about wire and then ran
Ok, and then he was not the last one. And you helped
others to go over the fence or you ran yourself?
Did you help the others to escape or were you just running away?
No, we tried to: cut off the wire and were getting away
Hm
Yes
No, he
The last one
He cuts the about wire and they were the last ones out
Ok And so, where did he go to?
Where did you
Where did he go?
Where were you running after that?
Me?
Where, yes? What place?
Yes, where were you running from the camp, place?
The camp
Where did you run?
You went to the wood?
That one, where, where we had that harvest
Maybe, a field
No, maybe there was a field, there was no field
Ah! That´s where you did harvesting
Yes
Eh-eh-eh, I didn´t undersHe was running into the forest, in the forest or[?]
They were running into the forest, yes
They ran into the forest
But where were you running?
We were running into the forest
But into the forest through
They ran into the forest
Ran into the forest
Yes
Also ran
And in the forest you met Pečerskij?
And there you met Pečerskij? In the forest?
Me, me personally with Pečerskij, I was alone
You alone?
You left the camp with Pečerskij or not?
Me, me with Pečerskij left the camp as the last one
Were you and Pečerskij together in one group?
Yes
There were two of them?
No
A group, in a group
In a group. Aha. He left the in a group with Pečerskij
Ok, ok. And then you met, and then later you split it
on small groups, did you go with Pečerskij then?
After that you were still in small groups, did you stay with Pečerskij?
With Pečerskij? We stayed. We stayed together up to the last day.
We with Pečerskij already left the camp as the last ones
We stayed with Pečerskij up to the last day, we left the
camp together. May I ask that question again? About No?
No, no, he answered it
Ok
Ok, sorry
No, no, no
So, you went with Pečerskij to the partisans?
Did you get together with Pečerskij to the partisans? Did you find the others?
With Pečerskij we came to agreement that we leave with those
ones, with those ones we came, with those ones we leave
Did you go to the partisans together with Pečerskij?
With Pečerskij I left after Arkadij almost as the first one
It means, he went another way
He that way, he tried to went away, and we went the other way
In general, finally you found yourself at the partisans without Pečerskij
Without Pečerskij
Yes, he added, that in the partisans without Pečerskij.
Ah, with Waitzpapier, yes? Together with him?
Yes
With Waitzpapier
Waitzpapier was with you, yes?
Waitzpapier was the commander of the division, he commanded
Yes, he was the commander of the division, he was with Waitzpapier
then, Pečerskij did not go with him to the partisans
Ok. And which group of the partisans, where you came, can you say what kind of partisans it was?
What kind of a partisan group was it? Do you remember anything about it?
The ones, who came from Russia, were brought. It was a prospecting group
And you incorporated with it, yes?
Yes
You with it, with this group, incorporated
Incorporated
The Russians, yes?
Russian partisans
Ok. I think, we should stop. I still now want to talk five minutes about
Dem’janjuk and after that I think, we should stop for today
Ok, she would like, if it is possible, to talk to you for 5 minutes about Dem’janjuk
and then it´s enough for you for today, we think, it´s too tiresomely
I prefer to come back tomorrow then
Would it be possible to find a window, a chasm tomorrow, so we could come back, when you, well
You’re such a nice man
You, you, you are so nice, we don´t want to annoy you. Would it be possible to
talk for 5 more minutes about Dem’janjuk, and then tomorrow, as you will say
The leader of the uprising
Yes, Pečerskij was the leader of the rebellion
Absolut
Absolut, yes
And all the questions [unclear] to Pečerskij
All the questions?
Well, all through him
Yes, all the questions
Through Pečerskij
Yes, that questions’ve gone through Pečerskij
You recently told, that you recognized Dem’janjuk
Eh?
You have told recently, that you were recognizing Dem’janjuk, that you recognized that it
Did you recognize Dem’janjuk, who is being sued now?
I know him, know him, know. He will be shot
[laughing] He will be shot, he said?
He yes, he is convinced about it
He thinks, that he shou[ld, that he’ll be probably be shut, he’s rather convinced.
Yes, he did recently recognized him and he is convinced that he would be executed
Do you remember anything about Dem’janjuk?
I remember
I remember. I remember as he was going to work, at 7 o´clock in the morning,
he was pacing along the platz, along the territory, to work
At 7 o´clock he
He escorted the line, yes, took it out?
He didn´t take the line out
Well, the workers
He took out the workers
The workers, the brigade?
Mh, he remembers: at 7 o’clock in the morning he accompanied the working brigade in the camp
And you were in that working brigade?
And you personally were in this working brigade, yes?
I was in the working brigade
No, you didn´t work in the forest
I worked in the forest
He said, he was, and his grandson says – no, you did not work in the forest. Just [unclear]
You said, you remember Dem’janjuk
So you remember Dem’janjuk?
You remember? Yes
What do you remember?
Eh?
What, what do you remember?
I remember everything The neighbors, and Pečerskij,
and not Pečerskij, all of them, we knew each other
Only about Dem’janjuk
About Dem’janjuk?
Yes
About Dem’janjuk. I knew him through work
Through work?
Through work, yes
You knew him as your work?
They didn´t show Dem’janjuk after work
After work Dem’janjuk was not
Do you want to start with after the war?
Yeah, the late time of the partisans
Today she wants to talk with you about well, about a little bit
later in the war. You were already working with partisans
Yes
were in Russia. And nobody knew, what happened there. What happened then, well, during the late war?
After the war
Well, after or the last years, during, eh, the work with
partisans. The last years of war, the last, yeah?
Yeah, the last moments
The last moments of the war. The last days, the last months. What do you remember?
Where did you fight, in what ranks?
I had to fight a lot I went through much in the war, like you wouldn’t believe!
I went through Poland as well as through Germany and I had to everything
Well, from the partisans, where did you come?
From the partisans I came into that, to the Belorussian
Into the 76th
First it was called the Belorussian military district, and then, and then well, I had to go there
The 76th division
Eh?
I didn’t understand
The 76th division
The 76th, yes
He was
Later I stayed to serve there
In the army, you stayed in the army
Yes
After the partisans he returned to to Belarus, yeah, you returned to Belarus, yeah?
No, it was the Belorussian army and division
Yeah
The 76th
The 76th division
It was called so before, and then – the 76th division, he went there after the partisans
After the partisans I was called up in Belarus. I served in Belarus
After the partisans
[in a whisper, unclear]
Ok. After the partisans he was, just continued service
in the Soviet Army in the Belorussian division
Yes, I understood
It’s clear
Where did you end the war?
I ended the war in Germany
Tell there – to the camera
I ended the war in Germany. This, on the border to this There in the war
The war was so, well, the war, it just makes you laugh, this war
In what city?
The city, this one, well, on the border on the border I have forgotten
Rostenburg
Eh?
Rastenburg?
How?
Yes
Rastenburg?
Yeah
As the war ended ? he was in the city of Rastenburg
What?
Rastenburg is a place, where you were when the war ended?
Yes. I was still fighting, I went till the attack. That I, that I fell off the horse. The horse
was so quick, it was so strong, and I was jumping. The horse bent down and threw me off
Eh, can you
The horse threw him off, well, he is telling an episode It retained
in his memory: the horse threw him off, it bent down and
The horse threw him off, it means
You fall off the horse, yeah?
Yes, off the horse
He fall off the horse
Yes, this is an episode, an episode in the army, an episode
When, then He’s remembering one episode in the army where he fall off the horse
There – in Rastenburg
In Rastenburg
How long did you stay there?
We were there a couple of days
No, one more year
Eh
In what year did you go from Germany?
What?
You were started to be called off?
We were started to be called off then, in winter, I mean in autumn
Yes
[in a wisper, unclear]
In 46 you returned from Rastenburg. 46.
They left Germany in 46
They left, they left Germany in 46.
Till 46 they still stayed there about a year
So, until then they still stayed in the region
There were very many girls, girls in this city
Many[?]
Girls
[laughing altogether]
There were a lot of girls in that, in that city
Do you still? remember the moment of victory? Where was he, when he heard it?
Do you remember the moment of the victory? Where were you?
This, I remember this, when the war was ended
Tell
And we celebrated the Victory Day
Tell about it, please
Where were you?
[sighing] It was so nice: we walked, met everybody, it was nice
In Rastenburg
It was in Rastenburg. People met, they walked, everything was so good
Did they have festivities?
Were there any arrangements? Arrangements, festivities?
In the city?
Yes, we walked, celebrated all this, everything was good
Everything was good, we walked
This city The war, military and frontier (boundary?) eh well, how shall I say: it was, it was
Was it a military city?
A military city and this it was and it was, everything
Well, there were a lot of, as the saying goes[ military points there, yeah?
Many – the whole city. It was a city
Aha
this city
It was a military city, I guess, a military zone
Absolutely. So, when he left Germany, did he go by train to Russia?
When you left Germany, you went by train to Russia? Train?
No, we, we were in the military, the army went with us.
How were you going from there?
Eh?
In what way?
By the way of the army
From Germany
By train, on foot?
On foot
On foot? They walked. The army walked. On foot?
No, in the year 46 you left Germany
Germany. We walked through
No, and how far, when you went to Königsberg, by what were you conveyed?
We, so to say, the war, the war, there was the war
Well, already after the war
After the war all the same
In 46
we were accompanied by the army. The army accompanied us.
Well, the army, it’s clear. But by what means did you get to Königsberg?
We walked to Königsberg, we played football there with the German Army, we had won then
It was there, where you played – in Germany?
Yes, we had won then
So, it was at that time: this year while they were staying
there; he plays football, they played football
Is he a soccer-player?
Yes
He is a soccer-player and they played football. While they were waiting, right?
Yes, at that time, when they were staying there – one year, till 46
Then they walked on foot
they played football
[in a whisper, unclear]
that is what he said
And then how were you conveyed to Königsberg?
Then to Königsberg, we were conveyed to Königsberg, into the military unit
By echelons?
No, with the army
Well, on foot or by what means? Or in echelons?
No, on foot
You walked on foot?
Yes
Ok, understood
It’s clear. He says, that he walked
Yes, I understand
and before they left he was playing football, because he is a soccer-player. It’s clear
Did
It is, of course, to say it once again, there were German girls there were many
[laughing]
And we forgot the ours , the ours We were, were, were young, we were
Sure
There were a lot of girls
Yes
Young, right? There were many young girls there
[laughing]
Were active, strong
They were active and strong and girls, girls [laughing]
When you were in those years there, when you were in those
years there, did you think a lot about Sobibor?
You mean in Königsberg?
Yeah
Already
And then, then we were taken to Königsberg, we were in Königsberg.
From, from Königsberg we moved then to Moscow
Moved?
Yes
Where?
Moscow
From Königsberg to Moscow?
Yes
And when did you move to Pskov?
Eh?
Didn’t you go to Pskov?
Who?
You?
To Pskov? No.
He went from Königsberg to Moscow
They walked
And how did you eh go from Königsberg? You went on foot to Moscow or there was a train to Moscow?
By train, by train
By train. With a train. Now I’m going to ask Then, in those years, did you think
a lot about Sobibor, about the camp, did you think a lot about it then?
There was no time to think over, the life there was so: there was everything, and the
army still stayed, we accompanied the army, we sent them through there was sea. From
there we were conveyed to, into the city itself, it was great, so to speak. It was good
there. And we were welcomed – girls welcomed us There was no time to think over, because
you were walking. There were many, many girls. There were many girls
There I just didn’tThere was no possibility
He stayed in the ranks of the Soviet Army
Yes
So
And there was no possibility [unclear]?
I did not have any possibility, because I served in the army and I stayed to
serve. They began to call off (withdraw) the army from there, from Königsberg
and we stayed further in the army [unclear] army, the strong army
This is not good. So, stop
[pause]
Russian city and
Pskov?
No, we were still, were still, still in the war, the war was still lasting, we were still,
were still afraid of going out in the city, it was not allowed at 11 o’clock, you could
get bullet
Yes. We stayed in the forces, we stayed in good forces: air-landing
forces, we became air-landing, we were parachutists (paratroopers)
It was already after, after returning from Königsberg?
Already in Königsberg we, we were, so these were military forces
Already air-landing?
Air-landing forces, yes. But we didn’t have any parachutes then
Speak to the camera
And, and we jumped a lot parachutes, so, in Pskov, in Pskov – there were many jumps there
It means, that after Königsberg he went to from eh He stayed once more time in the eh army?
In 46 they came to Königsberg
Yes
were stationed there. And then you went
On the New Year’s Day, we went on the New Year’s Day
On the New Year’s Day?
On the New Year’s Day
And to Hada, when did you go to Hodorov?
To Hodorov I went, I lived here in the Soviet, I got
demobilized, I was demobilized, I was a civil man
Aha
I came there, I came, I had a girl – Nina, I married her
Polina
Yes, and the man was major, he served [?] bandits. The life was good, the life was great
No, he
Moment
[pause]
a question, ok?
Yeah
If it is possible, we would come back to the question about these years
directly after the war. Did you think a lot about the camp or Sobibor?
I very much to marry
No, did you think about Sobibor?
About Sobibor, I was there, about Sobibor I didn’t, I didn’t yet, I didn’t think about Sobibor
After the war?
You didn’t think about it?
I didn’t think about Sobibor yet
No, I did not think about Sobibor after the war
Tried not to think about
Tried to
They moved the military unit in Sobibor and the german one [sighing] and
so I stayed there, I met a girl, this one, I met her, I went to her. Her
mother welcomed me, she fed me, gave me the food all the time
Directly after theJust a second to the interviewer
No So, you Did you have any thoughts about Sobibor after the war? Or did you try somehow
No, no, no, there weren’t any. There was a girl
You pushed them away
About the camp?
stayed in the camp and I stayed here, in the army, just at the making up of the
10th? division. Were just accepted, so to speak, into the military unit
Mm
It was good there: there’s mother, father, I have father on the photo there,
and mother, and aunt Irina, she received me, so to speak, like her own son
Well, you’ve jumped over a little bit
What?
He is jumping about in time, I’m trying to He, he is basically saying, he girls, he
Did you go to the birthplace after the war?
To the birthplace, to it
What year?
No. What year did you go to Hodorov?
To Hodorov? Directly after the war
After the war?
vAfter the war –directly to Hodorov
Tell us, please
To Hodorov, to Lvov, I was in Lvov. In Lvov, I stayed for a night there, at my acquaintances,
at acquaintances, there remained myI went then to a comrade - Bin?]čuk, which now
stayed in Hodorov and went to Israel. He has gone to Israel
I’m sorry, you went to Lvov
To his birthplace, to Hodorov
To Hodorov. After the war he went to Hodorov, which is where he came from
What did you get to know about your family there?
What did I get to know there? That a very, very good family. There was father,
there was mother. There were they – father and mother, they welcomed me
When you came back, was there your father already?
There was no father
Yes
I did not have father
Yes. His father was not there
Well, in Hodorov you got to know, that you did not have your family, right?
No, there I was already, I had already got acquainted with a girl
and began to live with her. Well I was received like an own one
But it, it was in Pskov
In Pskov, right
And I am asking] you about Hodorov
About Hodorov? In Hodorov, in Hodorov I stayed for three days
Three days
Only three days. I arrived, stayed there, walked around the city and left
He came for three days to Hodorov, he spent three days there, walked around and left
Nobody was there
No, no, nobody was in Hodorovo from your earlier life?
There were no relatives
No, no, no relatives
There were no relatives in Hodorov any more, everyone was killed
Everyone was killed
There were no relatives; there was neither father nor mother. There was not. Neither brothers
No father, no mother, no brothers
Everyone, everyone was killed
Everyone died
Can you ask him in those cases not to answer for him, because he is absolutely impotential
I know, but he’s telling you, what he says, he’s telling you, what he says
Did you ex During the war, all the time before, did you think,
they were killed, did you think a lot about them?
What?
During the war, did you know about their destinies or
did you think that they were probably still alive?
I could not understand anything, I knew nothing: whether the parents are alive or the parents
are dead, I did not know this. Then I came to Pskov, in Pskov I was acquainted with a wonderful
division commander, he acquainted me with his daughter, I got acquainted with her. I lived good
there, they fed me, dressed me. Helike a son, he took care of me the whole time
I see, I see. He, he has some wobble time. First he did not know, then he knew
No, he came after the war, then the locals told him, what happened, how it happened
And then to Pskov, right?
Then I left for my unit in Kingissepp, I left, then the division commander, the division commissar
sent me after my girl to marry her. I went, I brought her. I brought her, I dressed her, she had nothing
to put on: she was bare. smiling I brought her clothes, I bought everything in Leningrad
Really?
Yes
Can I translate? It was in Pskov, right?
Yes, ok. He went to Pskov
Near Pskov. Nea, the village of Nea, there he found his half
His[?]
His half
Yes
well, his wife
He met the daughter of someone in his division, fell in love,
brought her clothes, brought her grapes, married her
It was in 47
In 47 yeah
I served in Pskov, how long I served – more than 20 years
He served in Pskov 20 plus years
In the cadre of the army
In the cadre of the army, in the ranks of the army
Eh, when you were when there was victory, were you still with Semjon Rozenfield?
On the Victory Day were you still together with Semjon
Rozenfeld? On this day were you together or not?
Who?
Were you together with Semjon Rozenfeld on the Victory Day?
The Victory Day we celebrated at our place
Together
in Pskov
No, were you wih Rozenfeld, you
No, Rozenfeld
the Victory Day
No, Rozenfeld stayed in the rear, and Pečerskij, they stayed. I when
Stayed in Rastenburg
In Rastenburg
You celebrated the Victcory Day – was Rozenfeld with you or not?
Rozenfeld – not, Rozenfeld was not there, was not, was not. No, no, nobody was there
They were not
Neither Rozenfeld nor Pečerskij was with him on the Victory Day, in Rastenburg
And in Pskov, when I already came, moved to the unit in Pskov, I already came from this,
from the military unit like a paratrooper, I was already paratrooper, there was an army.
I already had, how much did I have – I already had 80 jumps, I jumped in Pskov And
then I, there I met Pečerskij, I got acquainted his wife, his wife came
Pečerskij’s wife. She is on the photos here, I have it A good wife, she was worrying the
whole time, that I’m full [laughing], that I’m not hungry, she was caring about me
In Pskov now
This, it was later, what he is telling, he has jumped over. When he met Pečerskij’s
wife for the first time, she was caring about him, that he is full [laughing]
Yes. He is recalling, how he met Pečerskij‘s wife for the first time and
she was making sure, that he ate well and she took good care of him
Was this after When was this?
When
Pečerskij‘s wife liked me, Pečerskij‘s wife liked me very much, like her own son
She liked you very much
Yes. I was her son; I was young, sturdy and parachutist,
paratrooper. Here, this here [taking the photoalbum]
When did you met Pečerskij‘s wife?
Pečerskij‘s? In this, in
In forty
In the year of 45
In 48?
Yes So, here is Pečerskij showing the photo, there is Pečerskij
Pečerskij
Moment, moment
Just a second
It’s me [showing the photo of him]
It’s you?
Yes
This is Alexej Angelovič Waitsen. So handsome
Pečerskij, his wife, he loved me like a son, he protected me from everyone
He loved you like a son. Pečerskij loved him like a son
Yes. And this one here was, this one here [showing the photo of Pečerskij?]
[in the bachkground:
Perhaps after the conversation?]
in Leningrad
Later
She will take photos
No, perhaps later?
We can later
After the conversation?
Later with you?
No, photos, later we will
Grandfather, let us look them later
Did you get an answer?
Aha
Now questions
Good
You’ll answer the questions
I’m, I’m trying, he As far as I know, he tried not
to After the war if, if he thought of his family
Yeah, this was my question
I know that and we’ve listened to several variants. She wanted to know: did you think a lot about
your family after the war, about the family you had lost. Did you think a lot about them?
No. I was thinking the whole time: I must marry. How old I already was – I was already 25, already
a young man. We asked in marriage. Well, this one, the regiment commissar’s wife, he introduced me
to his wife, I got acquainted with her. I was not without [interferences, unclear] reveler.
I have to stop for a second, I have problems with this
[pause]
I’m alone and the son and I don’t have anybody apart from the son. Bukrejev’s
wife fell in love with me very much, Bukrejeva loved me very much
He fell in love very much. Have I good understood it: he fell in love then, have I good understood?
This, yes, Bukrejev’s wife went after me: marry me, marry
me. I moved to Pskov, in Pskov I got acquainted with
I’m just translating
Well, there were many, who wanted to marry me. I came to Leningrad, in Leningrad I got
acquainted with Ljolja. So, a very nice girl as well. She was crying to me the whole
time: I’ll come to your home and we’ll marry, my mother gives me a permission, and
I and you And I was just 25, I was just a young chap, was a young chap
Moment. He understood, that he was alone, he understood, that he didn’t
have there any more, he went to Pskov, he fell in love with
Yeah
He talked about that, he married
In Pskov I got acquainted I played football, I played football good, I played for the
division team I was in the division, played And there With the division we stayed in
Rastenburg, in Rastenburg this In Pskov, then I was transferred to Pskov, then we travelled
a lot: I was in Leningrad almost weekly, weekly I was in Pskov
Many times
Many times he was in Pskov, he served
In Leningrad he was many times, he served in Pskov, played football for the division team
In Pskov?
Yes, he played football for the Pskov division
He served in Pskov and he also played football in the Pskov division
He already told Can you, please, ask him, eh How did you meet Pečerskij
after the war? How did you get into contact to them?
When did you meet Pečerskij for the first time after the war?
Pečerskij? I was also wounded. I was, I was wounded.
You were?
Yes, I went around like a wounded man, Pečerskij treated me also as his own son. I, me, these
commanders respected me. Pečerskij was stately, you have seen him on the photo, Pečerskij
When did you see him for the first time after the war?
Whom?
Pečerskij
Pečerskij? I saw him later in Pskov. Ten years later I went, I
came, I was in Pskov, I went to Pskov and there I saw his wife
In Rostov
yes, her, they showed me his daughter. Then, in Rastenburg
No [unclear]: I did not see this city?
You met each other in Pskov for the first time after the war? Right?
After the war, right
In Pskov
they gave me a ticket, they gave me a ticket, a ticket and I went to Pskov
To Rostov
I went to Rostov and in Rostov I finally met Ljolja and
Pečerskij, and we loved each other, each other
What year was it?
Eh? It was at the end of the 40-s years
At the end of the 40-s?
Yes. So, here, here is Pečerskij
SpT At the end of the 40-s he saw Pečerskij in Pskov, he also fell in love in Pskov with a girl
From Pskov he went to Rostov
And from Pskov he went to
Pečerskij lived in Rostov
Aha, Pečerskij lived in Rostov and he went from Pskov to Rostov
And, and Pečerskij got demobilized from the army in Pskov, he, his wife, his wife is, was? in Pskov
Did his wife live in Pskov?
No, she lived in this, in Hodorov, no, no, no, no, not
in Hodorov, but in What’s the name of this city?
Well, it’s good
Good
Bring me the photos, I’ll show them those football-players
I’ll show everything at once
He wants to, that we see the photos
We’ll do it later
Mh, later
I want to ask him: could he talk with anybody else than
Pečerskij about Sobibor? Did he tell his wife?
Did you talk with other people except Pečerskij about
Sobibor, for instance, did you talk with your wife?
No, no, no. We did not talk about it
No, we did not talk about it.
I did not tell to anybody, that I was in Sobibor, that I was, that
I lived in the concentration camp. I did not, did not talk.
I did not talk about Sobibor, did not talk about the concentration camp. And with
Can I just ask him, if he talked about it with Pečerskij? Аnd with Pečerskij
Of course he did. Did you asked him, if he talked to his wife?
I did not, I did not talk with Pečerskij
You didn’t talk? He says, he did not talk to Pečerskij about it
Did he talk to
No
And then, then I became friends with Pečerskij, I came to him, he got demobilized. He served,
he, he got his discharge and he was a military man, not a military man, but a civil man.
And there, in Rostov, he introduced me to Ljolja, to his wife and to his son
He introduced you in Rostov to Ljolja and to his son? Ljolja, it was his wife, right?
Yes
In Rostov Pečerskij introduced Alexej Angelovič to his wife Ljolja and to the son
He was to me I already had to leave for home; I was already at the end of the military
service. So, I wrote that I’m coming, I’m taking you home. I, I came to Rostov,
took my wife, took her to Leningrad, we came to Leningrad, in Leningrad I dressed
her, provided her with shoes, she was dressed from head to foot
But it was certainly already in the 50-s
Eh? No, in the 50-s I
[unclear]to the 50-s. He is trying to get a story-line
You were in the 50-s in Leningrad? When?
I was called up for military service, I served in the army, I had nowhere to go: I did not
have a wife, neither house, nor home – I have nothing And I married, I decided to marry.
I was from Pečerskij so, well, he was my father-in-law, he married me with his daughter
Daughter?
Yes
Ehh
He asked in marriage, but you did not marry
Eh?
Well, Polina Agafonovna was not his daughter after all
No, Polina Agafonovna was later, later
I’m trying to figure out if he had a daughter then
Did he marry?
Well, I wanna to get, what he, what he sayHe served in the army, then he lived also in Leningrad
No, you went to Leningrad for a parade
I went each year for a parade
To Leningrad?
To Leningrad
Well
And, and before this I married
He went into the ranks of the Soviet Army
Did he?
Yes
What year?
Well, he was joined up He? Well, after the end of the
war he got his discharge from the ranks the 46th
He left
the 46th
He left the ranks of the army in 46 after the war
So, then he came home, saw: there was neither house nor home, he did not have anybody,
and he made up his mind, he met Whom did you meet? Who brought you to the army?
Well, major Bukrejev. He introduced me I stayed for longer [unclear] how many days did I
stay? I stayed for about 5 days, I got acquainted and on the next day wanted to marry
All in all he decided to come back in the ranks of the Soviet Army
And, and then I decided to devote my life to the army
May I translate? After his coming back home, when he saw that there was nobody there?
Yes, yes
Ok, he returned home, saw – no one was there, decided to actually rejoining the army
[sighing] I still had there my acquaintances, where Pečerskij’s wife lived, I called
there, then after all I came there, I came to Rostov, I came to the stanitsa large
Cossack village and they registered me, the registration, they married me
You came to Rostov
In Rostov, yes
got acquainted with Pečerskij’s wife
I got acquainted there with Pečerskij’s wife
So, I did understand?
But it was later
Мh. He went to Rostov, met Pečerskij‘s wife
I still want to know, if he thought of Sobibor, when he started to talk about Sobibor?
Ok. When he started to talk about it – that’s a concrete question. When did you
begin to talk with other people about Sobibor, about the concentration camps?
About Sobibor?
When did you begin to talk about it?
I, I, I did never talk , I don’t remember any time. I just talked
about Sobibor when being in Pskov, then I talked about Sobibor
In Pskov you already talked about it?
Eh?
When did you talk?
or not? In Pskov? When did you talk for the first time after the war about Sobibor?
For the first time in Pskov
To whom? And whom did you talk to?
There was nobody to talk to, I did not have my parents any more. Neither father
nor mother, neither brothers nor sisters, everyone of my people died
About the camp, about the camp, what did you[?] You have
been in the camp, when did you talk for the first time?
Just a second, just a second
But I, but I did not confess, that I was in the camp
Nobody knew?
And when did you say for the first time about it?
When?
I just confessed, when I married in Leningrad
You married in Pskov
I, I married in the Leningrad region, then came to Pskov
Registered your marriage
brought my wife here from Pskov
First he said, he didn’t talk with anyone about it and now he says, he might have talked about it
And when did you talk about the camp?
I never mentioned the camp
To nobody?
No [=yes, to nobody]
Never?
Never
And to the wife?
Not to the wife as well
Never talked about it. Not to his wife, not to anyone
You were not allowed to talk to anybody ? without parents, without everyone
You were not allowed to talk to anybody?
To whom
It was not ok to talk about it, there was no one to talk to,
his family had died, he really couldn’t’ talk about it
She was god, she accompanied me to Kegesep, she accompanied me to the military unit, my wife;
and then she died, my wife. And I confessed to nobody, that Ilived, that I, that I was
Was in the camp
that I left the service, that I lived with someone – to nobody. And later I got
well-founded, they gave me an apartment, I already had my own nest. I came
In the year of 47 he married, took a girl from the Pskov region, the village of Nea
1947 he got married and he in the Pskov province
Yeah
His wife. His wife, her family was poor
It was a poor family
Neither father
There was nothing to put on; my wife had nothing to put on: neither
shoes nor boots. Nothing. To bring her to the military unit
There was nothing
She had nothing
Well, poor, poor, it was a poor family
SpT She was very poor and she didn’t have boots, she didn’t have anything
Everything that she had was I called in at a flea market, there
I bought everything. Apart from that she did not have anything
Was she also Jewish?
Was she, was she Jewish, your wife?
Who? No, she was Russian
No? No, Russian
was Russian
And he doesn’t know Do you know, when you, when it can be possible to talk about Sobibor?
When, if you know it, when was it possible to talk about Sobibor, to talk
about the camp? When did you begin to talk about it? To strangers?
I, I talked about the camp already in Pskov
Already in Pskov?
Yes. It was, we had already gone through this, through
one camp, the second one, the third one, then we went
Grandfather, collect your thoughts
Eh?
Just about the camp
He says, in Pskov he talked about it
When did you start to tell: that I was in the camp
In the camp? In Pskov, when we moved to Pskov, I began to speak
To whom did you tell this?
Eh? To friends
To friends?
Yes
There, where you served
In Pskov
He says, he told his friends in Pskov when he came, that he had been in the camp
You confessed, that you had been in the camp in Sobibor
In the camp, yes
He said, that he’d been in the camp
Then I made up my mind that I stay to serve in the Soviet
Army and I had been serving in the army for 22 years
He served 22 years in the Soviet army
And later, after that, when did you begin to talk; whom else did you tell?
It was
In the 50-s, 60-s, 80-s
I told nobody
Nobody
He did not talk to anyone about it, so we have to [unclear]
[unclear] Eh, he must have been very alone
Was it hard not to talk about it?
Well, you were not allowed to talk about it to that time. Later we started to jump. Parachute jumps.
When I had talked about it, then the OBHS, he means the NKVD would have taken me on its list (account?)
and – that’s over, they would have done away with me. They began to control at that time
The KGB
That’s why he could not talk about it. No, it would have been very dangerous
in terms that the KGB to talk about it, so it just wasn’t a choice
I want to take it
Just a moment, just a moment, we’ll talk first and then we’ll take it
I’m getting up
Yes, he tells, I think, he wants to show you something, but ask you, ask you
We’ll do pictures later
Later, she wants to look the photos later
Sit down, sit down
The KGB, I understand, it was forbidden to talk about
Sobibor, but when did it change with perestrojka?
So, we understand, that it was such a forbidden topic, well, a dangerous
subject. Did everything change during the period of Gorbačëv, during
the perestrojka? Did you begin to talk about it then, in the 80-s?
I began to talk in Kegesep, where I called in with a closed division team to play football. In
Kegesep, it is in the East Prussia, well, they stayed there to protect it and I stayed there
About Sobibor, well, when did you begin to speak openly about Sobibor?
About Sobibor? Well, I spoke openly already, already in
well, without frightening of anything, so
In Kegesep
No, he is just mixing things up [sighing]
Actually he did not talk to anyone, as the saying goes
To nobody
I understand. Of course he's saying, he just never talked about it
It was a closed theme
That theme was a closed theme, we understand that. We try to understand when he talked about this
And why weren’t you allowed to talk? Because you did not know, what awaited you: whether
you’ll stay in the air-landing forces or you’ll be sent to this another unit
You did not know what awaited you if you talk about it
There was nothing of that. Even when I married, I didn’t
tell anything to Ninočka, even when I was married
Did not talk to his wife, did not tell his grandchildren
Did you tell Polina Agafonovna, that you were prisoner of the camp?
No
Did not tell his wife
She did not know till, till her death
Did not know Well, he began in the 90-s, so
I see. He’s telling us that it was in the 90-s
Even the end of the 90-s
that he talked about it
At the end
At the end of the 90-s? At the end? The end of the 90-s, which is quite remarkable
He, he began to speak, but he talked so vague, so ambiguous, he didn’t tell any details
He started delicately talk about it, no details, of it, in the end
of the 90-s, which is about 10-15 years after perestrojka began
You could not tell anything, because you don’t know what is awaiting you the next day
You didn’t want to say anything, because you didn’t know what happen tomorrow
Now bring this, it will be interesting for her
Soon, you’ll just give the interview and then we’ll look it
Well, let us
We’ll do it later
Ok, I think, later is not a long time from now, but go ahead
I know. We are now breaking the silence about Sobibor and there is a
huge trial of Dem’janjuk. Is it very Why is it important for you?
Now it is spoken more about Sobibor, there is no more such a silence about that what happened
Nobody knew, I did not tell it to anybody
I understand. I did not talk to anyone about it. Now there is a trial. Why
Now, now I served in the regiment, I’m jumping now in the regiment
and I confess, that I served. It was allowed to tell this
He serves Yes, he couldn’t talk about it. The trial about Dem’janjuk is now taking place.
Why is this trial so important for you? We understand, that it is important, but why?
Dem’janjuk is now being sued, you know about it
I know
Is this trial important for you?
I, I, I, when I would meet him now, I would confess him, that I’m this Waitsen
Alexej, which served together with him, we served together; and then he left,
how long was he not here – for 2 years hasn’t he been here
You are asked about Dem’janjuk
I tell about Dem’janjuk as well
Which was warder
The warder, yeah. I would, I wouldn’t to be going to
When you were there, in the trial, would you tell anything
to him or to the court? About Dem’janjuk? Would you
I did not talk about him, no
What would you like to tell?
What I wanted to tell, then, and then I changed my mind, I thought that it makes
no sense to tell this. What if he got to know more, reconnaissance, the KGB
and they would take him and arrest him, and I couldn’t do anything
Arrest you?
Eh?
I said, what you would like to say if the trial – nothing and suddenly
the KGB could come and there could be consequences for me
But what would he say now in Frankfurt? In München, sorry
When you would have a possibility to be in München, there, where the
trial is taking place, what would you tell him or to the judge?
There were so many thoughts and there was nothing else
No, Dem’janjuk is now being sued
Yes
What could you tell at the trial?
What could I say? Well, I could say that there was someone – Dem’janjuk, that he was
in the SS-division, served there. I could tell everything, but I did not. I did not enlarge
on the apropos of this division. I served myself in the ?]30th division in the army
He would say, that he served in the SS-
In the Nazi-division
Yeah, he would say, that he had served in the Nazi-division
Mh
That Dem’janjuk served in the Nazi-division, the SS-division
And would he say more, he would stand in court, Dem’janjuk would be
there. Is there any words he wants to say to the world about it?
When you stayed there – you an Dem’janjuk – what would you
like to tell to the world about him? About Dem’janjuk?
I did not think over, never. I served both in Pskov and in Kingissepp, I served in many places
No
I did not tell anyone about Sobibor
He did not talk about Sobibor
What could you tell at the present moment about Dem’janjuk
What could I tell?
Yes
That there was such a bandit, I could tell everything, but I did not
He’s bandit, that’s he would say
But I did not tell
We understand
And, well, that he is a bandit and he is just fit for shooting
He is a bandit and he, he actually should be shot
You said, you recognized him
You recognized him, you recognized his face
I recognized, I recognized; he stayed in the division, then he came to serve
in the division, in the 630th? army; I knew his autobiography, I knew it
He knew his autobiography
[in a whisper, unclear]
He says, he wants to show you something
You should turn it off
Can you turn it off for a second?
Yeah, but I’m
[pause]
It was so: where you served, how long you served, how many jumps you made and how many
It was a forbidden subject
Forbidden, yes
It was a forbidden theme to talk about this. I wanna ask him And
this theme was not forbidden any more, eh, just a second
Eh?
Under Gorbačëv, do you remember Gorbačëv, yes, Michail Sergejevič?
Yes, yes
When he came to power, people did talk about it. Did you personally
talk under Gorbačëv, under the glasnost’?
We understood, remembered, but did not talk, no
Even then?
Even then
Didn't even talk about it then, under glasnost‘. Only at the end of the 90-ty years?
Yes
Only in the end of the 90-s
Then, then he, well, at the beginning of the 90-s we, so to speak, tortured him: tell us Because I,
the parents told me at certain time, that your grandfather had been in the concentration camp
Just a second, I’m translating Ok, please He started talking about it only
in the 90-s, because they – the children, the grandchildren – pushed him
to talk about it, because they heard from their parents, that grandfather had
been in the camps. I’m going ask him, how he heard from the parents
How heard the parents
Yes. Your parents, how did they get to know about it? They told you? How did parents get to know?
Parents did not know as well
No. Parents told, told me, but
How did they know?
ordered me to keep silence. They? Well, [sighing] I don’t
know, how father got to know, how father knew
[unclear]
O, can you come closer to the tape-recorder? He doesn’t know, how his parents
knew, but he does know, they swore him to silence about it, to talking about it,
but they did tell him. And he’s trying to remember, how it was possible, that
his parents would know. You did not talk about it with your children?
About Sobibor? You did not talk about it?
To the children?
To your children?
To the children – no
No, he did not talk to his children about it
The children did not know, nobody knew. It was not allowed
to talk about it, otherwise they would be sent to Siberia
You were afraid. They were afraid to be sent to Siberia if they talked about it. Can
I, may I ask yes? Eh, do you remember when these talks began in the 90-ty years?
Openly, yes, at the end of the 90-s
But somehow, your parents knew somehow
I was just a little boy, just a little boy, they told me,
that your grandfather was in the concentration camp
SpT I was a young boy and they said, your father was in a concentration camp
They told that they escaped. Naturally I had a question: how did they escape?
He said, he escaped and he said
Well, they said, they made an undermining and escaped, seven
persons, it was not given away, that the whole camp
[This part of the interview is translated in speech]